---
title: Me, Myself and Monads
author: Tim Walter <ChimiDEV>
author_title: Maintainer
author_url: https://github.com/ChimiDEV
author_image_url: https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/15871426
tags: [monads, functional programming, fantasy-land]
---

## Motivation

Since this is the first blog entry, let me describe my motivation behind this project.  
While getting more and more into functional programming, I stumbled across `Fantasy-Land` aka. the "Algebraic JavaScript Specification".
First I was pretty skeptical. Almost overwhelmed.
Additionally I didn't see the need at the time I've seen it first.
Which is the reason I parked the idea in the depths of my brain and forgot about it.
However, in the recent past I was more inclined by the idea of monads.
Finally I decided to come to peace with the specification.
I did take some time to study the fundaments of the Fantasy-Land and tried to use it in may daily life as software engineer.
And today I don't want to miss them anymore.

## Quick Introduction

Instead of coming with lots of confusing and abstract definitions and reasons what a monad is andy why one should use it,
let me introduce you to monads the practical way.

Think about `Monads` like a `Container` that can carry a value.
You can transform, handle and change that value in this container, but you might need to inspect (called `join` or `extract`) it at the end.  
You now will think _"Why should I want to encapsulate any of my values in such a construct?"_.  
**Simply said: To keep it pure.**

Imagine a function that does something "dangerous", e.g. retrieving a value from the user or parsing dynamic data.

```js
const parseSomething = x => {
  const tmp = JSON.parse(x);
  const expectedObj = dangerousParsing(tmp);
  return expectedObj.thatArrayShouldExist;
};

const data = parseSomething("{I'm not valid}");
data.usefulData.map(/*...*/);
// Process will crash.
```

Now one could start adding error handling inside the `parseSomething`.  
Let's say we're smart and do not want to throw any errors, since this will crash the process.
Instead we return `null`.

```js
parseSomething = x => {
  let tmp;
  try {
    tmp = JSON.parse(x);
  } catch (err) {
    return null;
  }

  let expectedObj;
  try {
    expectedObj = dangerousParsing(tmp);
  } catch (err) {
    return null;
  }

  return (expectedObj || {}).thatArrayShouldExist || null;
};

const data = parseSomething("{I'm not valid}");
// highlight-next-line
data.usefulData.map(/*...*/);
// Process might still crash.
```

Quite cumbersome (obviously I made it even more extreme as needed, but you get the idea).
However, now we introduced even more problems.
First of all we do return different **Types**: null or the successful parsed value.  
This is quite a problem, when we look above (highlighted line), the process will still crash.
Also we lose a lot of readability.

Let me introduce you `Maybe`.
Maybe is a monad, that either contains a value (often referred as `Just`) or simply `Nothing`.

Before we refactor our code, let's explain some methods a monad does come with.

- **map**: You might know _map_ from an array. This function accepts a function and will return the same monad with the transformed value using the supplied function.
- **ap**: Use this to apply a monad to another monad. Say the monad holds a function as value, than this will be used on the given monad's value.
- **chain**: Chain is especially useful, when handling a function that again returns the same monad.
  Why? Using a `.map` in this case would result in a `Maybe(Maybe(value))`. Not very convenient.
- **join or extract**: Use join to finally inspect the value of a monad.

Additional some hints, what a **Maybe** monad makes it special: Using a **Maybe** any operation will only be invoked, if the containing value **is not Nothing.**  
Now that you got some insights, what a monad comes with, see the refactored function from above:

```js
const parseSomething = x =>
  Maybe.of(x)
    .map(safeJsonParse)
    .chain(dangerousParsing) // dangerousParsing now returns a Maybe as well
    .map(safeGet('thatArrayShouldExist'));

// getOrElse is a method, that either returns your Maybe's value or the given default value.
parseSomething("{I'm not valid}")
  .getOrElse([])
  .map(/*...*/);
```

Much better right? Now lets even go further and remove any dot notation.

```js
const parseSomething = _.pipe(
  Maybe.of,
  map(safeJsonParse),
  chain(dangerousParsing),
  map(safeGet('thatArrayShouldExist'))
);

const transformParsed = transformer =>
  _.pipe(parseSomething, getOrElse([]), map(transformer));
```

Hopefully that gave you a simple introduction what monads are made of. I'll attach some references for a even more detailed (and sometimes even more confusing) explanations.

### References

- [My personal must read: Mostly Adequate Guide to Functional Programming (Chapter 8 if you looking for monads)](https://mostly-adequate.gitbooks.io/mostly-adequate-guide/content/)
- [Mysterious Maybe Monad](https://jrsinclair.com/articles/2016/marvellously-mysterious-javascript-maybe-monad/)
- [JS Monads Made Simple](https://medium.com/javascript-scene/javascript-monads-made-simple-7856be57bfe8)
- [Expressive Monads in JS](https://dev.to/rgeraldporter/building-expressive-monads-in-javascript-introduction-23b)
- [Elegant Error Handling with the Either Monad](https://blog.logrocket.com/elegant-error-handling-with-the-javascript-either-monad-76c7ae4924a1/)
- [Fantasy Land](https://github.com/fantasyland/fantasy-land)
